[Proposal 2: Run] Call and define benchmark tests as GitHub Action jobs & workflows (#93)
cncf-tags/green-reviews-tooling: docs/proposals/proposal-002-run.md

  - [Drawbacks (Optional)](#drawbacks-optional)
  - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  - [Infrastructure Needed (Optional)](#infrastructure-needed-optional)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

<!--
A good summary is at least a paragraph in length and should be written with a wide audience
in mind.

It should encompass the entire document, and serve as both future documentation
and as a quick reference for people coming by to learn the proposal's purpose
without reading the entire thing.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

## Motivation

<!--
This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals and non-goals of
this proposal. Describe why the change is important, how it fits into the project's
goals and the benefits to users.

It is helpful to frame this to answer the question: "What is the problem this proposal
is trying to solve?"
-->

> This proposal is part of the pipeline automation of the Green Reviews tooling for Falco (and new CNCF projects in the future). Currently, we are using Flux to watch the upstream Falco repository and run the benchmark tests constantly. For example, [this benchmark test](https://github.com/falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing/blob/main/kustomize/falco-driver/ebpf/stress-ng.yaml#L27-L32) is set up as a Kubernetes Deployment that runs an endless loop of [`stress-ng`](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/Kernel/Reference/stress-ng), which applies stress to the kernel. Instead, this proposal aims to provide a solution for how to deploy the benchmark tests only when they are needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal is part of the pipeline automation of the Green Reviews tooling for Falco (and new CNCF projects in the future). Currently, we are using Flux to watch the upstream Falco repository and run the benchmark workflow (See definition below) constantly. For example, [this benchmark job](https://github.com/falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing/blob/main/kustomize/falco-driver/ebpf/stress-ng.yaml#L27-L32) is set up as a Kubernetes Deployment that runs an endless loop of [`stress-ng`](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/Kernel/Reference/stress-ng), which applies stress to the kernel. Instead, this proposal aims to provide a solution for how to deploy the benchmark workflows only when they are needed.
```

Just using the same terminology also here

> Secondly, automating the way we run benchmark tests in this pipeline will help to make it easier and faster to add new benchmark tests. It will enable both the WG Green Reviews and CNCF project maintainers to come up with new benchmark tests and run them to get feedback faster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Secondly, automating the way we run benchmark workflows in this pipeline will help to make the process easier and faster. It will enable both the WG Green Reviews and CNCF project maintainers to come up with new benchmark jobs and run them to get feedback faster.
```

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the proposal. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

  - Describe the actions to take immediately after the trigger and deployment of the CNCF project defined in [Proposal 1](./proposal-001-trigger-and-deploy.md)

>   - Describe how the pipeline should _fetch_ the benchmark tests either from this repository (`cncf-tags/green-reviews-tooling`) or from an upstream repository (e.g. Falco's [`falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing`](https://github.com/falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Describe how the pipeline should _fetch_ the benchmark jobs either from this repository (`cncf-tags/green-reviews-tooling`) or from an upstream repository (e.g. Falco's [`falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing`](https://github.com/falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing)).
```

>   - Describe how the pipeline should _run_ the benchmark tests through GitHub Actions for a specific project e.g. Falco

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Describe how the pipeline should _run_ the benchmark workflows through GitHub Actions for a specific project e.g. Falco
```

>   - Communicate the changes needed to be made by the Falco team to change the benchmark test to a GitHub Action file.

Reviewer: Shall we open up this? Something like:
```suggestion
  - Communicate to CNCF Projects interested in a Green Review what is the structure they need to comply in the process of creating a new benchmark job
```

**Green Reviews maintainer helps to create a new benchmark test for a specific CNCF project**

As a Green Reviews maintainer, I can help a CNCF project maintainers to define the Functional Unit of a project so that the project maintainers can create a benchmark test.

**CNCF Project maintainer modifies or removes a benchmark test**

As a project maintainer, I can edit or remove a benchmark test if it is in a repository owned by the CNCF project itself, or otherwise if it’s in the Green Reviews repository by making a pull request with the changes.

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate?
Think broadly.  For example, consider how this will impact or be impacted
by scaling to support more CNCF Projects.

How will this affect the benchmark tests, CNCF Project Maintainers, pipeline maintainers, etc?
-->

As with every design document, there are multiple risks:

- Extensibility: At the moment Falco is the first and only project that requested a Green Review (very appreciated guinea pig 🙂). When other CNCF projects will request other Green Reviews, we will learn more and adapt the project as needed.

> - Scalability: Green Reviews contributors should empower and encourage CNCF project maintainers to create benchmark tests. The right collaboration will enable Green Reviews maintainers to scale to multiple projects (cause they will not need to understand the deployment details of every project) while producing higher quality metrics (cause the project is set up by the experts).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Scalability: Green Reviews contributors should empower and encourage CNCF project maintainers to create benchmark jobs. The right collaboration will enable Green Reviews maintainers to scale to multiple projects (cause they will not need to understand the deployment details of every project) while producing higher quality metrics (cause the project is set up by the experts).
```

In terms of the directory structure, in the `green-reviews-tooling` repository, we could create a subfolder such as `./github/workflows/benchmark-workflows` to contain the benchmark workflows.

#### Use Case 2: A GitHub Action job using a workflow defined in a _different_ repository

We want to accommodate different methods of setting up the tests depending on the CNCF project. Given this, the benchmark workflow containing the benchmark job could be defined in a different repository. In this case, the `benchmark_path` would be, for example, `falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing/.github/workflows/workflow.yml@v1`.

![Pipeline run](diagrams/pipeline-run.png "An example pipeline run")

### Benchmark jobs

The benchmark workflow which contains the benchmark jobs and their test steps may look like the following:

```yaml
# .github/workflows/tests/falco-benchmark-workflow.yaml
jobs:
  stress-ng-test:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - run: |
          # the action to take here depends on the Functional Unit of the CNCF project. wait for amount of time, for resources

>           kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing/main/kustomize/falco-driver/ebpf/stress-ng.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing/main/kustomize/falco-driver/ebpf/stress-ng.yaml
          # the one above is a workflow with a single benchmark job, but if your workflow needs multiple benchmark job, it is enough to define additional steps:
          # e.g. for redis-test: kubectl apply -f https://github.com/falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing/blob/main/kustomize/falco-driver/ebpf/redis.yaml
          # for event-generator-test -> kubectl apply -f https://github.com/falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing/blob/main/kustomize/falco-driver/ebpf/falco-event-generator.yaml
```
```

          wait 15m
      - delete: |
         kubectl delete -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing/main/kustomize/falco-driver/ebpf/stress-ng.yaml  # other Falco tests:

>   # - redis-test e.g. https://github.com/falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing/blob/main/kustomize/falco-driver/ebpf/redis.yaml

Reviewer: Maybe it is more clear to put this comment below the run and before the delete? See suggestion above

```yaml
# .github/workflows/tests/falco-benchmark-workflow.yaml
jobs:
  stress-ng-test:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - run: |
          # the action to take here depends on the Functional Unit of the CNCF project. wait for amount of time, for resources
          kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing/main/kustomize/falco-driver/ebpf/stress-ng.yaml
          # the one above is a workflow with a single benchmark job, but if your workflow needs multiple benchmark job, it is enough to define additional steps:
          # e.g. for redis-test: kubectl apply -f https://github.com/falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing/blob/main/kustomize/falco-driver/ebpf/redis.yaml
          # for event-generator-test -> kubectl apply -f https://github.com/falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing/blob/main/kustomize/falco-driver/ebpf/falco-event-generator.yaml
          wait 15m
      - delete: |
         kubectl delete -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing/main/kustomize/falco-driver/ebpf/stress-ng.yaml  # other Falco tests:

>   # - redis-test e.g. https://github.com/falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing/blob/main/kustomize/falco-driver/ebpf/redis.yaml
>   # - event-generator-test e.g. https://github.com/falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing/blob/main/kustomize/falco-driver/ebpf/falco-event-generator.yaml

Author: ```suggestion
```

As a Green Reviews maintainer, I can help a CNCF project maintainers to define the Functional Unit of a project so that the project maintainers can create a benchmark test.

**CNCF Project maintainer modifies or removes a benchmark test**

As a project maintainer, I can edit or remove a benchmark test if it is in a repository owned by the CNCF project itself, or otherwise if it’s in the Green Reviews repository by making a pull request with the changes.

<!--
As a Green Review WG reviewer,

As a Green Review WG cluster maintainer, -->

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate?
Think broadly.  For example, consider how this will impact or be impacted
by scaling to support more CNCF Projects.

How will this affect the benchmark tests, CNCF Project Maintainers, pipeline maintainers, etc?
-->

> As with every design document, there’s a risk that the solution doesn’t cover all cases, especially considering that at Green Reviews we have only had one test case (very appreciated guinea pig 🙂), which is Falco. This proposal needs to at least support that case. When other CNCF projects start using Green Reviews we will learn more and adapt the project as needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As with every design document, there are multiple risks:
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- extensibility: At the moment Falco is the first and only project that requested a Green Review (very appreciated guinea pig 🙂). When other CNCF projects will request other Green Reviews, we will learn more and adapt the project as needed.
```

> Another risk is the question of ownership between Green Reviews contributors and CNCF project maintainers. As much as possible, Green Reviews contributors should empower project maintainers to create the benchmark tests. This does not stop Green Reviews maintainers from creating new benchmark tests. However, project maintainers should be encouraged to lead this work. Otherwise, this could add load on Green Reviews maintainers and it is hard to scale. Project maintainers should lead this since they have the expertise about how the project scales and performs under load.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- scalability: Green Reviews contributors should empower and encourage CNCF project maintainers to create benchmark tests. The right collaboration will enable Green Reviews maintainers to scale to multiple projects (cause they will not need to understand the deployment details of every project) while producing higher quality metrics (cause the project is set up by the experts).
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- validity: this point is less trivial and also conflicting with the one above but worth mention. If every single project defines its own benchmarks how will it be possible to compare different Projects result? This needs [deeper investigation that will be discussed in a separate proposal](https://github.com/cncf-tags/green-reviews-tooling/issues/103.)
```

Reviewer 2: Thanks @AntonioDiTuri, nice! I applied those changes

### Definitions

There are different components defined here and shown in the following diagram.

![Green Reviews pipeline components](diagrams/green-reviews-pipeline-components.png "Green Reviews pipeline components")

Let's recap some of the components defined in [Proposal 1](proposal-001-trigger-and-deploy.md):
1. **Green Reviews pipeline**: the Continuous Integration pipeline which deploys a CNCF project to a test cluster, runs a set of benchmarks while measuring carbon emissions and stores the results. It is implemented by the workflows listed below.
2. **Cron workflow**: This refers to the initial GitHub Action workflow (described in proposal 1) and which dispatches a project workflow (see next definition).

> 3. **Benchmark workflow**: The project workflow is dispatched by the Cron workflow. A project workflow can be, for example, a Falco workflow. A project workflow deploys the project, calls the test workflow (see below), and then cleans up the deployment. A project workflow can be dispatched more than once if there are multiple subcomponents. In addition, a Project workflow, which is also just another GitHub Action workflow, contains a list of GitHub Action Jobs. These are a list of test jobs - more info below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Project workflow**: The project workflow is dispatched by the Cron workflow. A project workflow can be, for example, a Falco workflow. A project workflow deploys the project, calls the test workflow (see below), and then cleans up the deployment. A project workflow can be dispatched more than once if there are multiple subcomponents. In addition, a Project workflow, which is also just another GitHub Action workflow, contains a list of GitHub Action Jobs. These are a list of test jobs - more info below.
```

#### Use Case 2: A GitHub Action job using a workflow defined in a _different_ repository

We want to accommodate different methods of setting up the tests depending on the CNCF project. Given this, the test workflow containing the test instructions could be defined in a different repository. In this case, the `test_path` would be, for example, `falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing/.github/workflows/workflow.yml@v1`.

![Pipeline run](diagrams/pipeline-run.png "An example pipeline run")

### Test instructions

The test workflow which contains the test instructions may look like the following:

```yaml
# .github/workflows/tests/falco-test-workflow.yaml
jobs:
  stress-ng-test:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - run: |
          # the action to take here depends on the Functional Unit of the CNCF project. wait for amount of time, for resources
          kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing/main/kustomize/falco-driver/ebpf/stress-ng.yaml
          wait 15m

>           kubectl delete -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing/main/kustomize/falco-driver/ebpf/stress-ng.yaml

Reviewer: Something like this?
```suggestion
      - delete: |
         kubectl delete -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing/main/kustomize/falco-driver/ebpf/stress-ng.yaml
```

Reviewer 2: I put it in a different workflow, as I understood that was the suggestion of @rossf7. Take a look after I push the changes and let me know if it's ok

Reviewer 3: @locomundo sorry my feedback is late here :(

I think it should be a separate job like @AntonioDiTuri suggests with `if: ${{ always() }}` like we do here. So whatever happens the cleanup logic is executed. 

https://github.com/rossf7/green-reviews-tooling/blob/73bc1fd557c09d052aebab0b52613ae615ed0490/.github/workflows/benchmark-pipeline.yaml#L65

Calling a separate workflow is tricky because cron workflow would need to wait until the project workflow completes.

Reviewer 2: check, changing it!

Reviewer 3: @locomundo thank you! That looks good 👍

  # other Falco tests:
  # - redis-test e.g. https://github.com/falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing/blob/main/kustomize/falco-driver/ebpf/redis.yaml
  # - event-generator-test e.g. https://github.com/falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing/blob/main/kustomize/falco-driver/ebpf/falco-event-generator.yaml
  # TODO: should each test be a workflow or a job in a single workflow? as in, one test workflow per cncf project or multiple workflows per cncf project? TBD
```

The job has test instructions to apply the upstream Kubernetes manifest which contains a `while` loop that runs `stress-ng`. The manifest already defines where the test should run in the cluster i.e. in which namespace. The functional unit test is time-bound in this case and scoped to 15 minutes. Therefore, we deploy this test, wait for 15 minutes, then delete the manifest to end the loop. The test instructions depend on the functional unit of each CNCF project.

> In the example above, the Kubernetes manifest that is applied to the cluster is located in a different repository, but this could be located anywhere. This is due to preferences for CNCF project maintainers who may have a own repository with configuration related to the Green Reviews pipeline, as is the case with the Falco project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example above, the Kubernetes manifest that is applied to the cluster is located in a different repository: this is the case of an externally defined benchmark
```

Each workflow should ensure that any artefacts that were deployed as part of the test instructions should be deleted at the end of the test run.

### Authentication

Before the test workflow is called on, we assume that the workflow already contains a secret with a kubeconfig to authenticate with the test cluster and Falco has already been deployed to it. It is required that the pipeline authenticates with the Kubernetes cluster before running the job with the test.

### Versioning

For versioning, this syntax can be configured to use `@main` or `@another-branch` which would be nice for versioning and testing specific releases.

## Drawbacks (Optional)

<!--
What other approaches did you consider, and why did you rule them out? These do
not need to be as detailed as the proposal, but should include enough
information to express the idea and why it was not acceptable.
-->

## Alternatives

> <!--

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **mapping between workflows and jobs**: we have decided a 1:Many relationship, 1 workflow and many jobs, but a different option we evaluated was a 1:1 relationship. We choose for the first option cause it is simpler and gives a clear overview about what jobs are needed for a project workflow
```

  - Describe how the pipeline should _run_ the benchmark tests through GitHub Actions for a specific project e.g. Falco
  - Communicate the changes needed to be made by the Falco team to change the benchmark test to a GitHub Action file.
  - Provide _modularity_ for the benchmark tests.

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this proposal? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.

It is important to remember that non-goals are still equally important things
which will be dealt with one day but are not things which need to be dealt with immediately
within the scope of this work. This helps make sure everyone is crystal clear on the outcomes.
-->

* Defining or designing the content of benchmark tests themselves, or assigning responsibility for who should write them.

### Linked Docs

<!--
Provide links to previous discussions, Slack threads, motivation issues or any other document
with context. It is really helpful to provide a "source of truth" for the work
so that people aren't searching all over the place for lost context.
-->

> * [Slack discussion on benchmark test framework](https://cloud-native.slack.com/archives/C060EDHN431/p1708416918423089?thread_ts=1708348336.259699&cid=C060EDHN431)

Author: ```suggestion
```

> * [Slack discussion on benchmark test framework](https://cloud-native.slack.com/archives/C060EDHN431/p1708416918423089?thread_ts=1708348336.259699&cid=C060EDHN431)

Reviewer: Removed!

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is:
outlining your solution to the problem described in the Motivation section.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

### User Stories

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this proposal is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

**CNCF project maintainer creates a new benchmark test for their project**

> As a project maintainer, I create and run a benchmark test from a separate GitHub repository or from the green-reviews-tooling repository, by following the steps indicated in the Green Reviews documentation, so that the project’s benchmark tests runs in the Green Reviews pipeline and so that I can see the project's sustainability metrics.

Reviewer: I would slightly rephrase: 

`As a project maintainer, I am interested in creating benchmark tests by following the steps indicated in the Green Reviews documentation. My main interest is that the benchmarks recreate a runtime environment that is as realistic as possible. Only with the right environment we can see the right metrics.`

Comments: 
- I don't think we need details on where the benchmarks will be hosted in the user stories, I would keep it more high level
- The rest is just rephrasing to simplify a bit

**Green Reviews maintainer helps to create a new benchmark test for a specific CNCF project**

As a Green Reviews maintainer, I can help a CNCF project maintainers to define the Functional Unit of a project so that the project maintainers can create a benchmark test.

> **Project maintainer modifies or removes a benchmark test**

Reviewer: CNCF project maintainer?

Reviewer 2: Yes, so the CNCF project maintainer would be the developers of Falco for example. It's not clear?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**CNCF Project maintainer modifies or removes a benchmark test**
```

<!--
As a Green Review WG reviewer,

As a Green Review WG cluster maintainer, -->

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate?
Think broadly.  For example, consider how this will impact or be impacted
by scaling to support more CNCF Projects.

How will this affect the benchmark tests, CNCF Project Maintainers, pipeline maintainers, etc?
-->

As with every design document, there’s a risk that the solution doesn’t cover all cases, especially considering that at Green Reviews we have only had one test case (very appreciated guinea pig 🙂), which is Falco. This proposal needs to at least support that case. When other CNCF projects start using Green Reviews we will learn more and adapt the project as needed.

> Another risk is the question of ownership between Green Reviews contributors and CNCF project maintainers. As much as possible, Green Reviews contributors should empower project maintainers to create the benchmark tests. This does not stop Green Reviews maintainers from creating new benchmark tests. However, project maintainers should be encouraged to lead this work. Otherwise, this could add load on Green Reviews maintainers and it is hard to scale. Project maintainers should lead this since they have the expertise about how the project scales and performs under load.

Reviewer: I would simplify a bit and refer to the investigation issue: 

--- 
Another risk is the question of ownership between Green Reviews contributors and CNCF project maintainers. 

CNCF project maintainers should be allowed to define and maintain their own benchmarks to make sure that the right environment is configured. However if every projects run different benchmarks it would be though to compare results (sustainability metrics) between each other. 

This needs [deeper investigations that will be discussed in a separate proposal](https://github.com/cncf-tags/green-reviews-tooling/issues/103).

Reviewer 2: Yes, I think we are talking about two different potential (and perhaps conflicting) issues here:

- The **scalability** if we get many more CNCF projects interested and there's an expectation of Green Reviews WG to participate in writing the tests or in general helping the CNCF projects getting on board.
- The validity of comparing results if every CNCF project has a different criteria for making these tests.

Perhaps we should mention both, with the link you suggest for the second, @AntonioDiTuri ?

Reviewer: Yes definitely we should mention both! I also like the bullet point structure with a little tile per every point, let me propose some edits

change are understandable. This may include manifests or workflow examples
(though not always required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity
about HOW your proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

The Green Reviews automated pipeline relies on putting together different reusable GitHub Action workflows to modularise the different moving parts. A workflow runs one or more jobs, and each job runs one or more actions. It may be helpful to familiarise oneself with the documentation on [GitHub Action workflows](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/about-workflows) and especially [Reusing workflows](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/reusing-workflows) first to better understand the rest of the proposal as it explains some of these concepts well.  The section on [Calling reusable workflows](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/reusing-workflows#calling-a-reusable-workflow) describes an important concept that will be referenced later in this proposal.

### Definitions

There are different components defined here and shown in the following diagram.

> ![Green Reviews pipeline components](diagrams/green-reviews-pipeline-components.png "Green Reviews pipeline components")

Reviewer 4: Image is link is broken

> Let's recap some of the components defined in [Proposal 1](proposal-001-trigger-and-deploy.md):

Reviewer 4: Image Link is broken

Reviewer: If you mean link at line 191 is working for me.

Reviewer: Can we resolve this?

1. **Green Reviews pipeline**: the Continuous Integration pipeline which deploys a CNCF project to a test cluster, runs a set of benchmarks while measuring carbon emissions and stores the results. It is implemented by the workflows listed below.
2. **Cron workflow**: This refers to the initial GitHub Action workflow (described in proposal 1) and which dispatches a project workflow (see next definition).

> 3. **Benchmark workflow**: The project workflow is dispatched by the Cron workflow. A project workflow can be, for example, a Falco workflow. A project workflow deploys the project, calls the test workflow (see below), and then cleans up the deployment. A project workflow can be dispatched more than once if there are multiple subcomponents. In addition, a Project workflow, which is also just another GitHub Action workflow, contains a list of GitHub Action Jobs. These are a list of test jobs - more info below.

Reviewer: Yes, I agree, it would be better to split :)

> 3. **Benchmark workflow**: The project workflow is dispatched by the Cron workflow. A project workflow can be, for example, a Falco workflow. A project workflow deploys the project, calls the test workflow (see below), and then cleans up the deployment. A project workflow can be dispatched more than once if there are multiple subcomponents. In addition, a Project workflow, which is also just another GitHub Action workflow, contains a list of GitHub Action Jobs. These are a list of test jobs - more info below.

Reviewer: Would it be better to call point 3 Project workflow and not benchmark workflow?

Reviewer 3: > Would it be better to call point 3 Project workflow and not benchmark workflow?

Yes, I think that's a better name since the workflow will also call the deploy and delete steps.

> 3. **Benchmark workflow**: The project workflow is dispatched by the Cron workflow. A project workflow can be, for example, a Falco workflow. A project workflow deploys the project, calls the test workflow (see below), and then cleans up the deployment. A project workflow can be dispatched more than once if there are multiple subcomponents. In addition, a Project workflow, which is also just another GitHub Action workflow, contains a list of GitHub Action Jobs. These are a list of test jobs - more info below.

Reviewer 2: Sounds good. This needs to be changed in proposal 1?

> 3. **Benchmark workflow**: The project workflow is dispatched by the Cron workflow. A project workflow can be, for example, a Falco workflow. A project workflow deploys the project, calls the test workflow (see below), and then cleans up the deployment. A project workflow can be dispatched more than once if there are multiple subcomponents. In addition, a Project workflow, which is also just another GitHub Action workflow, contains a list of GitHub Action Jobs. These are a list of test jobs - more info below.

Reviewer 3: > This needs to be changed in proposal 1?

Yes, I'll do a PR to update it

> 3. **Benchmark workflow**: The project workflow is dispatched by the Cron workflow. A project workflow can be, for example, a Falco workflow. A project workflow deploys the project, calls the test workflow (see below), and then cleans up the deployment. A project workflow can be dispatched more than once if there are multiple subcomponents. In addition, a Project workflow, which is also just another GitHub Action workflow, contains a list of GitHub Action Jobs. These are a list of test jobs - more info below.

Reviewer: Please ping here when it's done so that we can resolve the conversation!

> 3. **Benchmark workflow**: The project workflow is dispatched by the Cron workflow. A project workflow can be, for example, a Falco workflow. A project workflow deploys the project, calls the test workflow (see below), and then cleans up the deployment. A project workflow can be dispatched more than once if there are multiple subcomponents. In addition, a Project workflow, which is also just another GitHub Action workflow, contains a list of GitHub Action Jobs. These are a list of test jobs - more info below.

Reviewer 2: (And then we have to change the text here so it's in line with the change in PR1...)

> 3. **Benchmark workflow**: The project workflow is dispatched by the Cron workflow. A project workflow can be, for example, a Falco workflow. A project workflow deploys the project, calls the test workflow (see below), and then cleans up the deployment. A project workflow can be dispatched more than once if there are multiple subcomponents. In addition, a Project workflow, which is also just another GitHub Action workflow, contains a list of GitHub Action Jobs. These are a list of test jobs - more info below.

Reviewer 3: @locomundo @AntonioDiTuri here is the PR with the proposal 1 changes
https://github.com/cncf-tags/green-reviews-tooling/pull/112

> 3. **Benchmark workflow**: The project workflow is dispatched by the Cron workflow. A project workflow can be, for example, a Falco workflow. A project workflow deploys the project, calls the test workflow (see below), and then cleans up the deployment. A project workflow can be dispatched more than once if there are multiple subcomponents. In addition, a Project workflow, which is also just another GitHub Action workflow, contains a list of GitHub Action Jobs. These are a list of test jobs - more info below.

Reviewer 3: Marking as resolved. We can discuss in #112

This proposal adds the following components:

> 1. **[new] Test job**: A test job is an instance of a GitHub Action Job. It is called right after deploying the CNCF project from the test workflow. The test job runs the test workflow and instructions for a CNCF project. Which benchmark test to run is defined by inputs in the calling workflow: a CNCF project and a subcomponent.

Reviewer: I would put the workflow at position 1 and the job at position 2: since the job is called from the workflow

2. **[new] Test workflow**: A test workflow is a separate manifest containing the test instructions.
3. **[new] Test instructions**: Test instructions define what should run tests on the cluster. These are usually related to the tool's Functional Unit as defined by the SCI. It is described further in the sections below.

### Calling the test workflow

When the project workflow starts, it deploys the project on the test environment and then runs the test job. For modularity and/or clarity, the test instructions could be defined in two different ways:

As a Job that calls another GitHub Action workflow (yes, yet another workflow 🙂) that contains the instructions. The workflow can be either:
  1. In the Green Reviews WG repository (**preferred**)
  2. In a separate repository, such as an upstream CNCF project repository

The two use cases for defining a test workflow are illustrated below.

> ![Calling the test job](diagrams/calling-test-job.png "Calling the test job")

Reviewer 4: Image link is broken

> ![Calling the test job](diagrams/calling-test-job.png "Calling the test job")

Reviewer 4: Image link is broken

Reviewer: also working for me

Reviewer: Can we resolve this?

```

This will fetch the workflow using the `jobs.<job_id>.uses` syntax defined [here](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions#jobsjob_iduses).

Below are two use cases: the test workflow may be defined in the Green Reviews repository or in a separate repository.

#### Use Case 1: A GitHub Action job using a workflow defined in the _same_ repository (preferred)

If the test workflow is located in the Green Reviews repository, `test_path` would refer to, for example, `cncf-tags/green-reviews-tooling/.github/workflows/falco-test-workflow.yml@v1`.

In terms of the directory structure, in the `green-reviews-tooling` repository, we could create a subfolder such as `./github/workflows/tests` to contain the test workflows.

#### Use Case 2: A GitHub Action job using a workflow defined in a _different_ repository

We want to accommodate different methods of setting up the tests depending on the CNCF project. Given this, the test workflow containing the test instructions could be defined in a different repository. In this case, the `test_path` would be, for example, `falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing/.github/workflows/workflow.yml@v1`.

> ![Pipeline run](diagrams/pipeline-run.png "An example pipeline run")

Reviewer 4: Image link is broken

Reviewer: Can we resolve this?

### Test instructions

The test workflow which contains the test instructions may look like the following:

```yaml
# .github/workflows/tests/falco-test-workflow.yaml
jobs:
  stress-ng-test:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - run: |
          # the action to take here depends on the Functional Unit of the CNCF project. wait for amount of time, for resources
          kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing/main/kustomize/falco-driver/ebpf/stress-ng.yaml
          wait 15m
          kubectl delete -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing/main/kustomize/falco-driver/ebpf/stress-ng.yaml
  # other Falco tests:
  # - redis-test e.g. https://github.com/falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing/blob/main/kustomize/falco-driver/ebpf/redis.yaml
  # - event-generator-test e.g. https://github.com/falcosecurity/cncf-green-review-testing/blob/main/kustomize/falco-driver/ebpf/falco-event-generator.yaml

>   # TODO: should each test be a workflow or a job in a single workflow? as in, one test workflow per cncf project or multiple workflows per cncf project? TBD

Author: Would appreciate input on this one!

Reviewer: Yes I am also in favor of having one workflow per project with multiple jobs

Reviewer 2: I agree - simple is always better - we can always make it more complex if the need arises

Reviewer 2: One question, though: for Falco is this going to work? Don't they have three different tests already?

Reviewer 3: Falco have 3 configurations they want to test which are each different falco drivers. The falco project workflow will be called once per driver so it will work with this design.

What we can't do is run different benchmarks per config but I don't think that is needed.

Reviewer: Yeah and inside every single workflow step2 needs to run 3 different jobs, all defined in an external repo

```

The job has test instructions to apply the upstream Kubernetes manifest which contains a `while` loop that runs `stress-ng`. The manifest already defines where the test should run in the cluster i.e. in which namespace. The functional unit test is time-bound in this case and scoped to 15 minutes. Therefore, we deploy this test, wait for 15 minutes, then delete the manifest to end the loop. The test instructions depend on the functional unit of each CNCF project.

> In the example above, the Kubernetes manifest that is applied to the cluster is located in a different repository, but this could be located anywhere. This is due to preferences for CNCF project maintainers who may have a own repository with configuration related to the Green Reviews pipeline, as is the case with the Falco project.

Reviewer: I would simplify here: 

In the example above, the Kubernetes manifest that is applied to the cluster is located in a different repository: this is the case of an externally defined benchmark

Each workflow should ensure that any artefacts that were deployed as part of the test instructions should be deleted at the end of the test run.

### Authentication

> Before the test workflow is called on, we assume that the workflow already contains a secret with a kubeconfig to authenticate with the test cluster and Falco has already been deployed to it. It is required that the pipeline authenticates with the Kubernetes cluster before running the job with the test.

Reviewer: Is this taken care of in proposal 1?

Reviewer 5: Yes but every job start a new VM so we need to authenticate again for every job who need to interact with the cluster. I think the test workflow should take as input a kubeconfig and use it to authenticate.

Reviewer 2: Yes, that was the idea we had as well @SFulpius 👍

Reviewer 4: @SFulpius not sure if I get it by `every job start a new VM`, AFAIR We don't create Infra for every job. Actually we are storing the kubeconfig as a secret and utilizing (with special perms ;) )
cc @rossf7

Reviewer 4: @SFulpius not sure about `every job start a new VM`, AFAIR infra part is only touched at main branch changes and (cp: 1, wp: 2). we are getting the Kubeconfig only from the gh.secrets. not sure if we need to update the tokens for the kubeconfig, TTL in k3s is  no defined ;)

cc @rossf7

Reviewer 5: @dipankardas011 
What I wanted to say is that every Github Actions job runs in a new VM, thus we need to authenticate in each job interacting with the cluster.

Reviewer 4: Yes, using gh secrets 👍

Reviewer: Yeah sorry my bad, it was already written [here](https://github.com/cncf-tags/green-reviews-tooling/pull/93/files#:~:text=benchmark%2Dpipeline.yaml-,jobs%3A,%60%60%60,-This%20will%20fetch), all good!

### Versioning

For versioning, this syntax can be configured to use `@main` or `@another-branch` which would be nice for versioning and testing specific releases.

## Drawbacks (Optional)

<!--
What other approaches did you consider, and why did you rule them out? These do
not need to be as detailed as the proposal, but should include enough
information to express the idea and why it was not acceptable.
-->

## Alternatives

<!--

> What other approaches did you consider, and why did you rule them out? These do

Reviewer: I would list here the alternative design of having one workflow per job

Author: To add:
- CNCF <-> benchmark test: one-to-one or one-to-many relationship? Start with 1:1 and support 1:many in the future

Reviewer: see above

1. **Green Reviews pipeline**: the Continuous Integration pipeline which deploys a CNCF project to a test cluster, runs a set of benchmarks while measuring carbon emissions and stores the results. It is implemented by the workflows listed below.
2. **Cron workflow**: This refers to the initial GitHub Action workflow (described in proposal 1) and which dispatches a project workflow (see next definition), as well as a delete workflow to clean up the resources created by the project workflow.
3. **Project workflow**: The project workflow is dispatched by the Cron workflow. A project workflow can be, for example, a Falco workflow. A project workflow deploys the project and calls the test workflow (see below). A project workflow can be dispatched more than once if there are multiple project variants/setups. In addition, a Project workflow, which is also just another GitHub Action workflow, contains a list of GitHub Action Jobs. These are a list of test jobs - more info below.
4. **Delete/cleanup workflow**: This is the one to make sure that the resources created by the project workflow are deleted so the environments go back to the initial state.

> This proposal adds the following components:

Reviewer: I read again the all document and I have a comment on this one. 

There is a couple of issues that are not captured after we took some decisions last week.

I would simplify a bit by saying that:

A project workflow is composed of 3 steps: 
- Create resources
- Benchmark Workflow
- Delete Resources

Let us introduce two new components (with respect to the 4 above):
- Benchmark worfklow: a list of benchmark jobs that needs to be run (in parallel)
- Benchmark Job:  a list of test instructions that are executed on the cluster

A Benchmark workflow has a  1:many relationship with benchmark Jobs.

A Benchmark Job can be:
- internal: defined within the GRT repo
- external: defined outside

So I would so some renaming:
- test workflow -> benchmark worfklow
- test job -> benchmark job

I personally think that benchmark is better then test since it captures more what we are doing. 

Also attaching a picture to give a visual idea:

![Screenshot 2024-07-23 at 18 21 11](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5bf3cf96-ffb9-4349-8c45-04a8a400a0e5)

I think this naming is also bit more coherent with the first image. The downside is that we might need more changes
